Notes on Materials.json for Res wall finish

it should be understood that floor protection depends upon application method which i believe the research agent provided for. However the procedure in the spec is not accurate.  

Spray application floor covering procedure
- Hard flat floors (Hardwood, Plank, Tile, etc..) Cover with rosin/construction paper taped at exposed seams and tape line around perimiter of walls/baseboard.  
- Carpet would use a thick plastic taped down at edges and layed out tightly and securely.  typically a 1.5 to 3 mill plastic is used.  
- Floor covering must also be maintained throughout the project.  Typically swept and vacuumed between coats to remove dust and debri and also taping or repairing any rips and tears in the covering regularly.  

Brush and Roll, Brush only and Roll only applications can opt to do any of the following floor covering systems
1. Drop cloths only.  When ceilings included drop entire room, when walls or wall elements such as trim lay perimiter drop cloths/runners along application area. 
2. Tape edge along baseboard, Masking Paper 12-18in from tape edge outward and drop cloths under masking paper extending further out as needed. 

Masking 

When masking item such as windows or cabinets that are adjacent to surfaces to be painted, painters typically use a Masking Machine.  It is simply a device that combines masking paper or plastic to a roll of tape that distributes both items evenly. 
Masking paper can be purchased in rolls from 4in to 24in and these are very common on jobs
Masking Film can be purchased in rolls from 48in to 99in.  This is the film that is primarily used for covering large areas adjacent to spaces taht are to be painted.  This includes cabinets and showers, windows, doorways and even hardware like ceiling fans and so on. 

Visqueen .35mil plastic sheeting is bulk covering used to cover furniture, drape entire wallls and so on.  It is not intended to be walked on or in high traffic areas but can be used to make containments.  It can be purchased in a variety of lengths and widths. 

Plastic sheeting of 1.5 mil is typical for large floor covering such as garage floors when needed.  
Plastic sheeting of 3.0 to 6.0 mill is used when being applied under manlifts or abrasive blasting or epoxy coatings protection 

Tape 

There are several types of tape commonly used on painting projects.  
Regular masking tape (This is the common yellow/white inexpensive tape) 
	-Primary use - Bulk seam tape and multi purpose masking.  Not intended to be applied to delicate surfaces or newly installed coatings.  Also not intended to be in place for long.  Research recommended application time
Blue Painters Tape 
	- Primary use - standard masking for surfaces other than delicate surfaces.  This is an all purpose tape and can be left installed longer than Regular masking.  Research this
Green Masking Tape (Frog Tape)
	-Primary use - for sealing edges to prevent bleedthrough onto underlying surfaces.  This tape is more delicate than blue and can be left on a little longer.  Tape line paint edges turn out crisp.  Key to sealing tape edge is a wet rag wiped along edge after application and before painting.  
Yellow Delicate Surface Tape	
	-Primary use - for taping edges of delicate items primarily used on cabinets to prevent tearing veneers upon removal. 
	
There are also other tapes that have extended application duration times which allow the tape to be applied to a surface for long periods without the adhesive remaining on applied surface after removal and maintains ease of removal. 

Sandpaper and Applicators
Typically in painting we are using sanding blocks over sheets of standard sanding paper.  These come in grit ranges rather than specific grits.  You have Fine, Medium  and Course Grit sanding blocks.  These are the go to for most painters for sanding patches, trim and everything else other than entire wall/ceiling surfaces. 
Pole Sanders.  These are sanding tools that can receive sandpaper and be applied to sticks or extension poles.  They have real defined grits like standard sandpaper sheets.  These pads are commonly used for drywall sanding in between coats. 
	- Bare drywall and patches typically use 100 grit
	- First sand on repaint drywall before patching is sometimes 80grit
	- Between finish coats typically 220 grit.  
Power Sanders - Orbital, Dremel, Square Head
When sanding many doors or prepping wood work, built ins and so on we typically use the Orbital sander and detail edges (inside corners) with a dremel or sponge/block sand.  

Roller skins- replacement at a sf benchmark of 5,000 might be a recommendation, however this is a simple thing that could be at the contractors discrescion and not vital to the estimate.  
                quanitfying the amount of roller skins required for a scope of work would depend mostly upon the products being used (Primer, Ceiling Paint, Wall Paint, Trim Paint) and the amount of colors for each product
                Also clarification should be made for the size of the roller for instance cigar roller is a 4in small roller used for small surfaces and also in cutin procedure of most substrates.  A 4in barrel roller is a larger version of the cigar
                roller and holds more paint per dip.  A 9in roller is standard for rolling larger areas such as walls and ceilings or even large surface trim and flat panel doors in some cases.  Naps thickness varies.  a 14-18 in roller is typically what is used in many 
                spray and backroll scenarios and is a more efficient roller for large surfaces.  Nap size for these rollers depend upon intended finish quality and texture of substrate.  Roller material (Lambskin, Polyester, Microfiber, Foam) depends upon product requirements and shoudl be determined 
                by the PDS of the material being applied. 
                The roller quality tier multiplier is unnecassary and can be depricated 
				
Spackle
	Relies on substrate condition to determine usage rates.  We can run some research to try and determine a number with confidence but assigning 1 large tub of spackle for a 3500 sf project sounds about right.  However if there is new 
	trim like on new constrction that needs fasteners filled usage increases significantly.  We overfill fastener holes and sand them flush so there is much waste.  Method is used for any new builtin, wainscote, and paneling / shiplap walls and ceilings
	
Caulk
	usage determined by substrate conditions on interior repaints but typically not much usage over a couple of tubes.  On new construction interior and exterior there is much more usage and depends wholey on the size of the gaps on the project. 
	It would be overkill to try and record gap sizes so an average should be used for purchasing unless otherwise noted.  There are situations where some gaps are very large 1/8-1/2in or bigger and should be noted in some way for labor compensation as these gaps 
	require much more time to fill and may require a second coat of caulk to flush. 
	however most situations gaps are 1/64 to 1/8 of an inch and should be considered at the average with waste.
	Below is a chart the describes the usage per joint size.  On new construction we would want to use an average of 72' per tube and on repaint projects unless otherwise declared we would use a standard of 50% of trim needing to be touch up caulked so 200 to 300' per tube. 
	               JOINT WIDTHS
Joint Depth    1/8"   1/4"   3/8"   1/2"
----------------------------------------
   1/8"        96'    48'    36'    24'
   1/4"        48'    24'    18'    12'
   3/8"        32'    16'    12'     8'
   1/2"        24'    12'     9'     6'
   
   
Brushes
	currently on the repaint drywall spec it is showing 500 lf lifespan for a brush.  That is inaccurate.  Maybe 5,000 lf if the brush didnt receive any care but painters tend to care for their brushes.  Brushes should be an expense on projects but we should be able to simplify the calculation. 
	Lets for now say that we would want 1 brush per material, PDS should declare the type of brush but it is usually painters descresion.  This could also be calculated by direct relationship with the amount of paint required for completion of the job.  If the project is brush and roll there should be a new brush added per crew member for every 40 gallons of its related product.  
	This is a good starting benchmark. 

Production Rate equation.  Let us make sure it is understood that the standard should be that the time required is increased by modifier values rather than modifier values being applied to production rates. applying 1.5 to either of These would have opposite effects and needs to be understood.  	
	
Filling Nail holes sand repairs and sanding patches and repairs should be by SF when walls and LF when trim.  They should be related to condition of substrate to determine production but a baseline should be determined for QT3
The same goes for spot priming 

tsk_cut_to_tape for interior is 2 or 3x faster that freehand cutting line

Height modifiers for ceiling height recommendation of 1.0 for 7-8ft, 1.3 for 9-12ft, 1.5 for 13-17ft, 2.0 for 18ft and above

Room complexity modifiers recommendation should be only calculated on busy walls that have many shelves, cabinets and items.  We need to determine a good way of recording and calculating these complex rooms.  A good instance recommendation is bathrooms with hardware installed.  the complexity and cutin should be 2x.  
rooms with cabinets and fireplace walls are a good indicator of complexity as well.  
However windows and doors should not be considered because they can be measured and would be calculated in the cutin LF already. 

A note must be made in the system for color change and color contrast to be recorded when known in order to use this multiplier. 

Textured surfaces should also affect rolling and spraying tasks as well as taping and cutin work.  Appropriate modifiers should be applied to textured surfaces

QT4 all tasks should have modifiers applied of 1.3
QT5 all tasks including additional tasks/rounds should have modifiers applied of 1.5 if the condition of the substrate is in good condition.  If the condition of the substrate is in Fair or poor condition no modifiers needed as the tasks would be tagged as charged by the hourly labor rate and tracked hourly. 



Quality Tiers and Surface Condition

Tier Range qt2=minimal, no warrenty, properly painted surface with cheap materials, no prep, minimal coats.  Appartments, insurance projects for hud, quick color change projects.  Maintain properly painted surface and mitigate mess but aesthetics are not of importance
			qt3=standard as defined already
			qt4=premium as defined already
			qt6=superior as defined already.  Likely charged hourly.  if not then all tasks and steps from qt4 apply with additional inspection and modifier value of all tasks applied at 1.5
			
Surface Conditions - These only apply to repairable (spackle or skimcoat) surfaces.  Drywall patches where new drywall, compound or tape is necassary not included in these surface conditions as they shoudl be calculated seperately and by the SF
			Poor - Many repairs requiring skim coat, full sand and prime possible flag for replacement of substrate if quality tier of qt 4 or 5 is expectation
			Fair - Requires 2 or 3x coats of repairs in areas.  
			Good - Minimal Repairs light sand

The pilot specs for walls note previously painted latex or alkyd surface.  If an alkyd surface is present on a project it must be cleaned, sanded and primed before painting.  This should be noted in within the appropriate agent. 

